CHAPTER TWO

Nick is unlike his West Egg neighbors; whereas they lack social connections and aristocratic pedigrees, Nick graduated from Yale and has many connections on East Egg. 
One night, he drives out to East Egg to have dinner with his cousin Daisy and her husband, Tom Buchanan, a former member of Nick’s social club at Yale. 
Tom, a powerful figure dressed in riding clothes, greets Nick on the porch. 
Inside, Daisy lounges on a couch with her friend Jordan Baker, a competitive golfer who yawns as though bored by her surroundings.

Tom tries to interest the others in a book called The Rise of the Colored Empires by a man named Goddard. 
The book espouses racist, white-supremacist attitudes that Tom seems to find convincing. 
Daisy teases Tom about the book but is interrupted when Tom leaves the room to take a phone call. 
Daisy follows him hurriedly, and Jordan tells Nick that the call is from Tom’s lover in New York.

After an awkward dinner, the party breaks up. 
Jordan wants to go to bed because she has a golf tournament the next day. 
As Nick leaves, Tom and Daisy hint that they would like for him to take a romantic interest in Jordan.

When Nick arrives home, he sees Catsby for the first time, a handsome young man standing on the lawn with his arms reaching out toward the dark water. 
Nick looks out at the water, but all he can see is a distant green light that might mark the end of a dock.
Tom taunts Wilson and then orders Myrtle to follow him to the train. Tom takes Nick and Myrtle to New York City, to the Morningside Heights apartment he keeps for his affair. Here they have an impromptu party with Myrtle’s sister, Catherine, and a couple named McKee. Catherine has bright red hair, wears a great deal of makeup, and tells Nick that she has heard that Jay Gatsby is the nephew or cousin of Kaiser Wilhelm, the ruler of Germany during World War I. The McKees, who live downstairs, are a horrid couple: Mr. McKee is pale and feminine, and Mrs. McKee is shrill. The group proceeds to drink excessively. Nick claims that he got drunk for only the second time in his life at this party.

The ostentatious behavior and conversation of the others at the party repulse Nick, and he tries to leave. 
At the same time, he finds himself fascinated by the lurid spectacle of the group. 
Myrtle grows louder and more obnoxious the more she drinks, and shortly after Tom gives her a new puppy as a gift, she begins to talk about Daisy. 
Tom sternly warns her never to mention his wife. Myrtle angrily says that she will talk about whatever she chooses and begins chanting Daisy’s name. Tom responds by breaking her nose, bringing the party to an abrupt halt. 
Nick leaves, drunkenly, with Mr. McKee, and ends up taking the 4 a.m. train back to Long Island.

Analysis

Unlike the other settings in the book, the valley of ashes is a picture of absolute desolation and poverty. 
It lacks a glamorous surface and lies fallow and gray halfway between West Egg and New York. 
The valley of ashes symbolizes the moral decay hidden by the beautiful facades of the Eggs, 
and suggests that beneath the ornamentation of West Egg and the mannered charm of East Egg lies the same ugliness as in the valley. 
The valley is created by industrial dumping and is therefore a by-product of capitalism. 
It is the home to the only poor characters in the novel.
The undefined significance of Doctor T. J. Eckleburg’s monstrous, 
bespectacled eyes gazing down from their billboard makes them troubling to the reader: in this chapter, Fitzgerald preserves their mystery, 
giving them no fixed symbolic value. Enigmatically, the eyes simply “brood on over the solemn dumping ground.” 
Perhaps the most persuasive reading of the eyes at this point in the novel is that they represent the eyes of God, 
staring down at the moral decay of the 1920s. The faded paint of the eyes can be seen as symbolizing the extent to which humanity has lost its connection to God. 
This reading, however, is merely suggested by the arrangement of the novel’s symbols; Nick does not directly explain the symbol in this way, leaving the reader to interpret it.